---
layout: post
title: Transcending Logarithms
---

I have become fascinated by the ability to think about and calculate the results of logarithmic functions in one's head. To me, logarithms have always felt like a black box that couldn't be conquered. They are a fundamental building block of mathematics, yet every time I saw a logarithmic equation, I was tempted to get out my calculator or to look up how to compute the example at hand. Over the past half year, I've spent some time building my understanding of logarithms and have learned how to compute the results of logarithmic equations by hand. Here I want to share what I've found!

To me, the ability of computing logarithms in one's head or at least purely by hand on paper would be greatly desirable. The number of new concepts we can hold in [working memory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Magical_Number_Seven,_Plus_or_Minus_Two) at any point in time is limited, so it makes sense to internalize as many conceptual building blocks as possible. This will allow you to reduce the amount of time spent on thought that's not problem-centric. For example, you'll be much more comfortable dealing with complex logarithmic equations etc. if you have a good intuition for basic logarithms themselves.

On another note, I think there is a lot to say in favor of the aesthetic beauty of performing complex calculations without any tools except for systematic analytic thought.

First of all, why is it that we don't all find logarithms to be intuitive? To answer this question, it was helpful to me to think of mathematical functions in terms of synthetic functions [^3] and their *destructive* inverse. For example, the addition $y = x + a$ builds up the value $y$ from $x$ and $a$ and the inverse of the additions destructs that value, yielding $y - a = x$. You can find a table of different examples of this for numerous functions and the restrictions that apply [here on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse_function#Standard_inverse_functions). You will notice, that at any level of complexity the inverse function is always harder to compute in your head or by hand than the original. The inverse is simply a more abstract operation that's even harder to grasp as the complexity of the base operation increases. This means that subtraction is harder to calculate on your own than addition and multiplication is harder than both addition and subtraction [^1].

For me the limit of what I could realistically compute or approximate in my head was square roots. This was likely due to the fact that in German high-school they make us memorize the square and thereby also square root of all numbers between 0 and 20. This became the base for teaching us about parabolas and later polynomials.

I can't recall whether or not I felt bored during those introductory classes but I am certain many people disliked endlessly performing simple calculations applying the same operation over and over again. Nonetheless, it seems to me that while it's a somewhat dry and simple method, memorizing a bunch of common values and then drilling their relationships is useful in building a base from which to build an even better intuition.

It's the same thing with addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. You are introduced to the general idea and then you drill it for a while to get a feel for it. This is definitely not the ultimate learning strategy and better methods of internalizing concepts are used everywhere outside of public schools [^2], but it highlights the importance of getting to a place where one doesn't need to think about the basics first. The goal is to minimize the amount of time spent on thought that isn't concerned with the central problem at hand.

For example, what's the square root of $17$? Not knowing how to algorithmically compute the best approximation of $\sqrt{17}$, we can make a pretty good *intuitive* guess by relying on our knowledge of square roots. We memorized that $\sqrt{16} = 4$, that the square of the next integer after $4$ is $5^2 = 25$ and that the function $f(x) = x^2$ is continuous. Based on this knowledge we're instantly able to say that $\sqrt{17}$ must be somewhere in the lower part of the interval $[4, 5]$. To improve our guess without doing any time-consuming trying-out, we can approximate $f(x)$ for $4 \leq x \leq 5$ as a linear function. Based on this, we can conclude that since $25 - 16 = 9$ and $\sqrt{25} - \sqrt{16} = 5 - 4 = 1$, $\sqrt{17} = \sqrt{16 + 1} \approx 4 + \frac{1}{9}$. All of these calculations can be easily performed in one's head or quickly be scribbled down on a piece of paper. I hope now that you see why this is so exciting! By pure memorization of a few example values and internalizing the relationships of the operations we need by drilling them, it's possible to make very fast guesses about otherwise complex computations. To prove my point, let's find out how good our guess was. $4 + \frac{1}{9} \approx 4.111$ and $\sqrt{17} \approx 4.123$: our guess was off by only $0.012$. Imagine if you could approximate something like $log_{10}(64)$ just as quickly!


[^1]: This is about how difficult the calculation feels and how long it takes to carry out, not about how hard it would theoretically be, given you knew all possible algorithms, tricks and exceptions.

[^2]: For example if you want to remember something long term, [spaced repetition](https://ncase.me/remember/) is a [much better strategy](https://gwern.net/spaced-repetition) than drilling it very intensely for a shorter amount of time. This seems to be a common problem (or misconception) about project based learning. Without repetition, it's easy to forget concepts that were used only once during a single project. It also applies to learning for exams and is likely a factor in why many students don't think learning for an exam is actually worth it. I've found that the experience of learning during either a project or for an exam becomes much more rewarding by putting in a small amount of extra work in repeating the content a few times so that it sticks much longer.

[^3]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/mathematics/inverse-operation is a starting point. Just like Knuth, it has a lot of interesting stuff to say about logarithms.